Introduction 

Bangalore, or Bengaluru as it goes by officially these days, was until some years ago known as the ‘Silicon Valley of India’ due to its IT/startup culture causing one disruption after another. Many Indian startups have been incubated here, while their global counterparts (startups as well as mega corporations) have chosen to locate their India hub of operations in the city, which is also the capital of the southern Indian state of Maharashtra. Uber, Amazon, Google, Zomato, Ola and Apple are just a few examples in this regard. But off late, Bangalore has been losing its sheen as the so-called startup hub, due to various problems, primarily infrastructure-based, clogging the city. On the other hand, various incentives and policies at the local and state government level, designed to attract investments into other cities, have thrown up quite a few challengers to Bangalore. A very prominent one among them is Pune, located in the western Indian state of Maharashtra. Pune has been traditionally known as the cultural hub of Maharashtra, as opposed to its commercial counterpart and state capital Mumbai. Home to renowned educational institutions, the city is now also coming up as a prominent home to startups, IT as well as non-IT based. Lower costs of living, conducive and fast connectivity with Mumbai thanks to an expressway, are among the few factors causing entrepreneurs and young urban professionals to look at Pune as a viable alternative to Bangalore. While a comparison of Pune and Bangalore by themselves in terms of innovation drivers or places to live and work in may be beyond the scope of this project, I’ll still attempt to compare two areas/neighbourhoods in the cities from an urban culture perspective and try to show which area/city today has better choices today for the young urban professional, in terms of entertainment and relaxation facilities. The two areas chosen for my study are Koregaon Park in Pune and Indiranagar in Bangalore.

Methodology

At the outset, I have to state that the limitations of working with data, especially geospatial data, in India are immense. This may not be much different for working with data anywhere else or any other sector. Yet, there are many limitations in the Indian context. The primary among them is a seemingly random way of street naming and clustering of city areas under districts. Parallely, there are no ready datasets available in terms of Wikipedia pages or .csv files for neighbourhood/postcode organization for Indian cities, unlike their bigger global counterparts like New York City or Toronto. I will still attempt to work with what I have, viz Google Maps and Foursquare APIs. Rather than a limitation, Google Maps as well as Foursquare APIs can be used to leverage the project, given both the apps have found large scale acceptance in Indian cities. That in turn, is all thanks to smartphones reaching Indian users on an unprecedented scale. So as a reverse engineering solution to gaps in administrative action, the crowd sourcing of Google Maps has helped put many Indian city neighbourhoods as properly identifiable locations. The folium, json and matplotlib packages in Python have been used to visualise the data. Apart from this, the shapely package to mannipulate the gerographical coordinates and scikit learn to cluster and analyse neighbourhoods using k-means clustering have also been used. All the data/code can be found in the accompanying notebook.

Results and Discussion

The results certainly look interesting, very simply from the fact that Pune, long known as a laidback college town as compared to its never-sleeping cousin Mumbai, seems to have more spots to let your hair down at the end of a long day. To be fair, even Bangalore had the reputation of being a city of retirees and pensioners. Yet, if a basic data-driven comparison of two very prominent areas of the two cities is any indicator, Indiranagar may not be as ‘happening’ as the initial idea may have been. Koregaon Park, on the other hand, totally seems to live up to its image as the spot to be in town, if you’re a young urban professional earning enough to have a decent lifestyle. On the other hand, less commercialization also means more space for greenery and lesser pollution, though that is beyond the scope of this project. Taking all sorts of inaccuracies into account (which I have also tried to clean up to the best of my abilities), Koregaon Park looks like a clear winner over Indiranagar if you are planning a move to a new city to get your social life in top gear.

Conclusion

As indicated earlier, the first (and almost always primary) problem facing a data scientist is the availability of the data itself. Cleanup and exploratory analysis are also made difficult by the nature of the data being very messy, especially when it comes to public records in India. There have been efforts in the recent years to tackle this problem and gather and store data for Indian public spaces systematically, through manual as well as automated entries. While choosing to settle down in a particular city may not be a business problem per se, it still reflects the mindset of certain demographics and how it impacts the overall economic development of a city or town. Towards this, I have tried my best to present a picture with my nascent data science skills.
